---
published: '06.02.2022'
intro: 'Get started with the key terms and concepts'
title: 'Concepts'
---

### Ann and Bob
There are two types of people who encounter this topic. One of them is Ann, who is familiar with dividends, payout ratios, etc. Bob, on the other hand, has no idea what any of these terms mean, but is nonetheless intrigued and encouraged about them. It is my intention to write both of them. Maybe a post would summarize things in a meaningful way if you already know something. For people who do not know everything, it is recommended to read ahead.
     
### How do I plan to earn from this?
To start with, and put simply: from the dividend. The dividend itself is the money a company pays from its profit to its shareholders. There are several companies out there with a long (I mean more than 50 years) dividend payout history. This will be backbone for our long term investment process.,
     
### Okay, but which companies
you may ask. It is a perfect question. There are several metrics which guides through the process of choosing a worthy company. The key concept is: high returns = high quality + high current yield + high growth of yield. Stay tuned, because I will share my evaluation of companies when I buy shares from one of them.
     
### Is it applicable at any time?
I try to measure companies worth-of-buy metrics always compared to some other key metrics in the industry, like Standard and Poor’s average numbers or the long term US bonds yield just to mention a few. This makes measurement a bit easier, as you may encounter the posts and information here later in time. If I tell you that I bought company XYZ in February, 2022 that information wouldn’t be so useful for you 2 years later.
     
### Recommended references
The Single Best Investment by Lowell Miller