---
published: '01.03.2022'
intro: 'What to do when there is a crisis?'
title: 'Possible tactics for managing your portfolio in a crisis'
type: 'Concept'
---

## The scene

I am pretty sure all of you have heard about the situation in East-Europe, Ukraine. Because of the fear and uncertanity in these situation, the market is much more volatile druing these period than in normal times. 

### Possibilities

Because the situation is quite ugly there - hope it will normalize as soon as possible - the average investor wants to defend their investments against the swings.

__How can you do that?__ 

There are four different tactics and behaviour that people always follow in these times. There are

1. Panic and sell
2. Doing nothing
3. Buying
4. Selling for short

Let's go over each of these steps to see why people behaves this way. But before that, some psychological facts.

### Psychological aspects

There were several studies about the subject of how people feel the gain and loss. The following turned out

__People feel the same amount of loss two times more painful than they feel happiness for the same amount of gain__

This explains a lot of thing. Usually we would like to avoid losing money, seeing the value dropping radically day by day is not a good feeling. What do people usually do?

### Panic and sell

With the understanding of the above mentioned facts, we arrived at our first 'strategy'. It is hard to call this a _strategy_ because it is more likely a quick decision without any deep investigation. Previously, I emphasized the key characteristic of an investor - who plans to _invest_ instead of gambling - and panic and fear was definetly not on the list.

__What are the problems with selling during a crash?__ 

1. You never know where is the bottom
2. You do not take any of the real metric of a company into consideration
3. You follow the herd, which is usually a bad thing

The problems are mentioned in matter of importance. So if you sell now, would you mind it two months from now? Of course, if the stock crashes completely, you will not, but that is rarely (almost never) the case. _Companies are still active businesses_, only the thoughts of people have changed on the market.

### Doing nothing

If you accept the fact, that you can never predict the depth of the well, then it would be suitable for you just to lay back, not checking out the prices at all for the next two(four, six?) weeks.

 __Do nothing.__ Read, do some exercise, listen to music and _do not read the press_. I know, I should suggest something easier because it requires nerves made of steel. But on the long run, it can be fruitful. 

_The market will calm down, prices will return to the same level as before_. This is definetely a better option than the first one. Do you know what can be much better?

### Buy

Now we reached the best option in my opinion. Only a few people thinks about this during a crash which suprises me. Think about it for a few moment:

__If the market falls, dou you have better or worst options now for your long term plans?__ 

- How did the P/E (the magic number everyone checks, but..) change?
- How did the dividend yield change?

__All the important metrics are favor you more than before__, why not to buy more? Because prices can fall even lower levels? Do not forget that you bought at a much higher level just a few weeks/months ago! 

If it was a good buy then, it smells like an even better possibility now!

### The psichology

In the third case, where you have excess cash to buy mentally guides you as well. You will feel like _you control everything_. You are not helpless and just sitting in a -hopefully not- sinking boat.

In my honest opinion, it is good to always have some excess cash on your investment account. Not too much, because that money not works for you without invested in, __but that can help you bot mentally and financially during vilatile times__.

### Selling for short

I left this for the last one, because it has enormous risk involved and I would never recommend this to anyon who is not professional and really aware of the possible outcomes.

NOTE!

__With this, your loss does not have an upper limit__. You can lose much more than you have. 

But to describe this option as well:

- 'borrow' some stocks 
- sell it now
- if the price goes down, buy back and give back the share

With this, and if and only the price falls to lower levels, you can earn the difference between your borrowed price and the buyback price. 

_If the market does not favor your and the price goes up instead of falling, you are in trouble._ You still have to give back the 'borrowed' shared, but you will lose the difference.

### Final thought

__Stick to a plan!__

As one of my favourite PM told me a couple of week ago:

> With a plan, when everything goes bad the plan is freaked up. Without a plan, everything is freaked up.

In my next post I will come back and describe how to make a plan and how to stick to it. 