---
published: '19.03.2022'
intro: 'How can cancel culture affect your possible future returns?'
title: 'Cancel culture in the financial world'
---

## Cancel culture in the financial world

Recently I was listening to a podcast, where a few analyst were talking about this topic. Maybe Spotify just knows me well enough, but previously (when those scandals were going on) I was thinking for a short time about this possibility in the financial world as well.

__How can cancel culture affects the companies traded publicly?__

Join me as I would like to give some tips and insights about the cancel culture in the financial world.

## What does the past reveal for us?

You do not really have to travel a lot back in time to find a really great example for this. You were just chilling with you family at Christhmas Eve, 2019 while the oil companies simply started halving in market capitalization in about 2 months.

Just a quick overview of 2 of them:

__Period: 2019.12 - 2020.03__

1. Royal Dutch Shell ~241 B -> ~86B
2. Exxon Mobil ~295B -> ~160B
3. Elon Musk ~100B -> ~125B

Of course, the latter is just here for fun facts: when your wealth alone suddenly wirth more then Royal Dutch Shell. Funny. :) 

## Were there any real indicators behind?

Of course, you can tell that it was because of the pandemic, but oil and gas companies still struggled for a long time after this 'crash' and now striking again because of the uncertain situation in East-Europe.

To put it honestly, at that time there were only a few indicators, that could have caused this sort of panicking. 

While it is absolutely true, that oil and gas companies should and will be revalued over time - because of the sustainabilty of the economics.

## How can it affect your investment?

I am not a magician nor someone who can predict the future, but in my honest opinion, because of the mentality and moral of the investors, there will be several other _cancelled_ companies in the upcoming years as well.

This drastical amount of market capitalization loss can have extremely bad affects on the business you have chosen, so here are some tips to select wisely.

### Check previous records

Does the company has some wrong grades? I am thinking about possible lawsuits, previous scandals against the company. Having some serious touble in the past can have two outcome:

1. People forget and forgive
2. The company and the management will do the same again

Two completely different outcomes.

### Think as a wise monk

If you are open-minded and checking out what is going on the world, you may have an overall feeling where the civilization is heading. From this, you can have a well enough sense to tell whether you company will be affecte by the cancel culture in the financial world or not.

Oil, plastic, some drugs store, coal just to mention some.

## ESG 

Uh, oh, I can not see this coming either. But somehow my brain connected these two. There is an upcoming (or maybe well-known already?) trend in the investing world, called ESG. The abbreviation stands for _environmental, social and governance_ analysis. 

I think, it is worth to keep an open eye on how your company will meet these 'requirements' and how will you company will bear with the cancel culture in the investing world.

